# The Church of the Everlight

One of the defining features of the 2<sup>nd</sup> Empire is its wholesale shift from a broad panthodic belief and dedication to the Gods of Eden, those now kept firmly on the far side of the Edict and away from the Material Plane, to the philosophy-come-religion of the Church of the Everlight. Though little known among the common body of the faith, The Church is itself a reinvention of the Church of Man once preached in the enemy state of Patrie du Pape. Indeed from it was inherited the word Church and indeed a lot of the vocabulary and practices.

In some form or other, the missionaries of the rival Greater Materia had filtered into Imperial society ever since first contact, but little did the faith take root, and even less so when it was actively suppressed during the war of great powers. The Godfall itself saw any further input disappear with the severing of travel and civilization, and popular support shrank in the face of overwhelming damage from spiritual entities, at least at first. But the faithful were stalwart, and in time the powers they claimed waxed and were particularly effective against the tide of outsiders as well as the growing rise of tyranny from the Sorcerer Kings, slowly seeing to a grass roots blooming of popularity, particularly in the Crownlands. Churches replaced temples in towns and villages for hundreds of miles, and the power of their faith both literal and in the hearts and minds of men bloomed.

### Return to Man
The Church of the Everlight has a creed that expresses seeing people become their best selves through enlightenment, prayer and dedications to the image of the First Men, or at least an idealised ur-man that may or may not have ever existed (though that is of course heresy). Calm, collected, and righteous, the ur-man of the Everlight does right. They worship a particular dogma of the Firstfather, Sendum, who they call the “Everlight”. That ‘The Universe Shines with Purpose, and we are the Stewards of the Torch passed to us by the Firstfather’. The Everlight, then, is within all of them, and in all has a chance to shine.

One of their primary tenets is a return to this 'First Man', before the blood of the people was twisted form their original divine image by the various Lines that exist. While this provided them with great boons, useful in the face of arcane corruptions during the tail end of the Deicide and during the Age of Strife, the dogma of the Everlight rejections them as corruptions. This puts them in contention with many of the incumbent nobles, who are proud of their fey touched breeding, and many of the ‘legitimate’ licensed mage circles who value the access to The Gift bloodlines often provide. 

### The Saints
Even many other incumbent clerics were put off by the hardliners, as the hardliners would say that any line is a corruption and include those of the white blood, those blessed by Good and marked by halo. But at the Synod of Loebeck Church leaders of the growing regional organisation of Everlight churches in 1336 A.C. welcomed the Ásar as "The Saints", those charged with the burden of outside influence to help others become their better selves, forever barring themselves from the ideal so that others may instead reach enlightenment with their aid. 

### Supremacy
The religion is uniquely positioned in opposition to all the other Gods while also being able to push them out, as they’re entities of the Firmaments. Bound now by the Edict they have little say or ability to curtail their own disenfranchisement by Everlight faithful, who see Sendum as an extra-universal creator God and therefore worship worthy, not pander-worthy. The fact that Sendum is also conveniently non-participatory (as Sendum is ‘dead’ in so far as shattered and spread throughout all living beings at the moment of creation) whilst also embodied in all life allowing church both divine power and free reign of authority and dogmatic flexibility, especially over the generations of the existence of the church and the naturally changing nature of culture and politics. To state things in such a way would too be blasphemy. Sendum lives in all, as they say, and only their righteous path gives them in particular access to Its divine power, which seemingly waxes year on year not through refinement and study, but divine providence. Of course.

And so say those of the Everlight, that they're superior to "The Old Gods".

One other area of theological contention and question of superiority is the position of halflings in the faith. The Church of the Everlight says they are their own first man, members of The Little Ones, and so deserve equal idolisation in their own way. Does that actually happen? By and large in the organisations of the faith, no; especially in the original faith practiced in Patrie du Pape. The church refuses a split in organisation so fundamental, as theoretically the First Men and Little Ones are fundamentally different unique creations, but to treat them as such is not in their interest, and with not enough halflings to in the hierarchy of the faith to contest the issue, it gets side-lined. 

To this day, faithful halflings are nearly always laymen, and many shires and boroughs are home to a significantly lower proportion of faithful.

### The Purified
One particularly zealous cohort of adherents are the Tuskmen of the New Army, many officers of whom have undergone ‘Purification’, for they see their original form as a curse. The details of this ritual being a state secret, all that anyone really knows is that it returns them to their human form and they all come out as righteous if not more so as before. Many of those recruits and expatriates of Ihleiska became early ardent believers, propagating the new faith among the Tuskmen who remained in Czondazan and Elóna, and even a few fiefs of Ihleiska. As such, the New Army which made heavy use of aligned Tuskmen was particularly adherent to the faith, and those returning from the Army became ambassadors of the faith themselves.

### State Religion
Being an offshoot of the Kingdom of B&W’s own Church of Man, the Church of the Everlight had to undergo significant 'rebranding', and only very recently became the state religion with the ascension of Stannis Hauttergeit, who had been a staunch believer since before he entered the political stage as a young lad. His conversion is a State secret, though rumours abound about his Orc personal guard, the "First Purified" Saint Pál. Did he convert the young Emperor? Or did the Emperor him?

Ascending to the Bronze Throne young Stannis decreed that the Everlight was his religion, and thus the Empire's, naming himself Head of Church and State. In this area alone was the new Great not idolised and adherently followed, for it ruffled too many feathers. Whilst the young emperor rode the wave of fervour he had cultivated in Capital to emperorship, with the anti-corruption rhetoric striking a chord to those plagued by demented outsiders and cosmic corruption, the same support could not be said to be present in many of the other duchies, polities and cities of the Empire outside of the core of the Crownlands, and now this imposition of faith is coming back to shake this fragile Second Empire, perhaps to pieces.