# Magic in the Empire

Magic can be said to define the modern Empire, in that its abuse in the face of chaos saw the old Empire crumble into warring fiefs capable, and frequently guilty of, great horrors. The core of the Second Empire's very authority comes from its claim to police magic and magic users strictly, swiftly and with great force. Every magic user in the Empire either holds one of their dear, both in rarity and in price, 'Mage Licenses' or is hunted by the special division of the New Army: the Mage Hunters, or one of the many, many licensed guilds of bounty hunters.



### Spell Schools of the Empire
The various spells found within the Existentiae are as varied as their practitioners, but the magi of the Empire have cobbled together a classification system of 8 schools, patterned off of ancient arcane writings, even if that isn’t the be all and end all, especially for the other domains.

These spell schools are often condensed, and mixed, into more application-oriented schools, that is - physical academies, and institutions across the Empire and beyond, as part of or independent to educational facilities. Some are singular instutitions, others are factions with multiple locales spread across Mitteland and beyond in the Shards of the colonial Empire. These are:

**The Warders** – naturally based in Abjuration, they use nearly all the other schools to create wards, for defensive as well as practical purposes. Their courses on risk assessment, mitigation, and analysis also see employment in many other fields, and their schools have more non-magical students that others. Indeed, some of the more provicial schools of the Warders have no magical component to their education and fulfil a budding need for primary education in the Empire.

**The School of Material Enchantment** – colloquial known as ‘The Enchanters’, they focus on Conjuration and Transmutation to create and enhance items and power many industrial processes. Somewhat confusingly, then, they’ve little to do with Enchantment magic, whose aim is the enrapture of minds. The focus on business also sees very broad application, similar to The Warders, and in the New Academy of Civilian Arts’ the school also offers various mathematics and economics classes taken by those without even a sliver of the gift. The Enchanters have only one main education facility within Naça, but many workshops and guild houses fulfilling orders across the Empire.

**The Imagers** – focusing on Enchantment and Phantom Magic they create illusions for tactical and entertainment purposes. Though pompous and dramatic, they are a critical component of the New Army, which gives their frequent Open Theatre Days a rather unique dichotomy of manner. The Imagers are as fractured as a faction can be, more of a loose conglomerate of groups tied by their craft, and even then only loosely (army Imagers would never be seen in the same room as a Mind Pleaser).

**The College of Divination** – almost purely focusing on the communications side of Divination, the College specialise in finding and ferrying information "to craft a better future", as their mandate goes. Though they are careful to iterate their official policy of not dabbling in fate. They are perhaps the most exclusive of the colleges, and most tightly bound to the royal courts, and like the Enchanters operate only one school, within the West Wing of the Imperial Palace itself. Only the very talented, very rich and very well connected earn the honour to become an Imperial Seer, with second-rate diviners taught through apprenticeship and serving their other imperial outposts.

**The War College** – focusing on using nearly all the schools to muster combat capability, though most imperial mages destined for the front-line (and a vast majority of the budget) focus on the combat applicability of Energy Magic.

### Healing Magic, the Domain of the Gods

It has long been known that magical healing is the domain of the Gods and only available if one goes to a priest. In more learned times we know that this is simply because bodies are incredibly complicated: more complicated than any other academic principle, even the mathematics of the high arcane. Arcane spells are crafted by the minds of men even as they seek to modify and evolve the work of the gods. Such is the power of the Gods that they could work healing even in the earliest of the days of Eden, when arcane magic was about as complicated as the Catapult spell. Until recently the most arcane magic could reach for was speeding up natural healing, and only now thanks to advances in medicine and the beginings of state-sponsored autopsy and surgery practices, can mages craft spells capable of reaching the heady heights of spells like ‘Cure Wounds’.

It goes without saying then, that anything like Resurrection is still squarely within the domain of the divine. Even now all agree that the priest’s seem to be much better at healing than the magi, and with virtually no training to boot.

Things are not helped by divine magics casual reaching for positive and negative energy, whereas arcana is the manipulation of mana alone meaning that to affect outer energies it must do so both at a remove, and at far greater expenditure of effort.

### Spell Creation and Spell Mining
Many weaves, and thus spells, are incredibly complex, with numerous effects occurring in tandem, all working towards the common goal of the spell. The sort of “weaves” Free Mages craft on the fly, if they can even be called that (which is really why Free Mages refer to “Gestures”) are about as complex as 1 tenth that of even a cantrip. This is why most spells originate from the hands of the Gods. Weaves are difficult in the extreme to create, as God-like levels of awareness and foresight are needed to build weaves that have the intended effect without untoward or disastrous side effects, all while being accomplished at a reasonable mana cost. 

Highly user oriented or “designed” spells tend to be products of the Gods as a matter of course, since creatures capable of designing such are pretty much Gods by definition anyway. That most useful spells must be safe to use, at least for the caster, and the amount of development needed to reach this point, by the very few people who can even try, means that spell creation is a rare thing indeed.

Sorcerers are most likely, of any random person, to “make” new spells, as their souls can intuit what their minds cannot, though if one can call unconscious spontaneous appearance “creation” is down to the individual. Sorcerers create weaves with a flash of instinct and insight, however they would be unable to explain the process, as it is just an extension of their self. Wizards and Mages can actively create spells, but need weave-sight to even begin doing so, and an intellect capable of functioning in the higher dimensions that weaves require, as well as the foresight to avoid intended, and potentially extremely dangerous, side effects. That or the time, patience and funding for necessary testing, and dummy casters suitably recompensed or deceived. Even the most genius of magi will only have enough focus, insight and research time to produce a handful of spells, and even then when they can enjoy the lifespan of the more longer lived folks. 

There exists the curious profession of Spell Miners, who rummage around in the souls of the magic touched for unknown weaves and try and copy them in a book (naturally re-imbursing them for their time under examination, if they're Good) and then sell on the spell at significant margins. Entirely because sorceress souls are a thing. While the common folk may not be entirely aware of the risks, it is an incredibly intimate and trusting thing to let another into ones soul to take a peek. Intimate, because all ones values, fundamental motives and emotional history is there to be read (though not as easily as a book, thankfully), and one places a lot of trust in the viewer to remain just that, a viewer, and not a meddler. This, and the use of corpses, stolen lifeforce and shadow, is the main reason Necromancy is so often considered evil. 