# Beyond

> "The Cosmology of the Universe is not entirely explained with the Three Bodies and the Firmaments. Some aspects of the world are even further beyond, or belong to strange quirks of creation. Some of what is left is written here." - Arche of Logos

### Demiplanes
The playgrounds of the most powerful beings, or collectives of like-minded beings of means, that wanted to have their own space, weaving a plane out of the most conducive fabric of the universe. Theoretically there can be an infinite number of them, and it is said only the Lord Servitor that sits at the pinnacle of the Great Machine in the heart of Mechanicus, and his Calculator, knows the precise number there are.

Seeth’s plane of flesh is one such demi-plane.

### The Beginning, Solaria
The Beginning exists, and always has. It is a place ever-changing yet immutable, a fact of existence. It is the root of all life from which souls come and return. It is the greatest of morsels that the Outer One hungers for. Solaria is observable in the constant echo of the universe and the shining brightness of the Suns of the planes, for the suns are, as the learned know, great Apertures that simply look upon the light of Solaria, and let it shine down on mortal and outsider alike. There, spread between the places between the planes, it swirls; all the memories, hopes, dreams, afflictions and experiences of all lives lived and yet lived, echoing throughout all time. The heart of a whole universe, it is fate incarnate. Its names are many: the Creator's; the Created; the Well of Life; Origin; The Beginning and End of All.

Those beings wise enough to observe, or powerful enough to visit, or enigmatic enough to have come to life there, also know it as Solaria, the realm of heat, light and life. Through divinely woven holes in the fabric of reality this shining realm looks upon us, and thus the rest of the planes receive their light. Some may source light from elsewhere (such as the Shadar-Kai’s Sun Spires) or deny their realm the gaze of the beginning, plunging all into shadow. Nevertheless all planes have an Aperture, it may simply be sealed shut, like a closed eye.

Solaria itself is no solar system with a sun at its centre and aperture-planets orbiting it. The whole realm, its very stuff, shines with bright light, heat and the feeding touch of Life. Its nominal centre is “denser”, meaning all of these effects are stronger, fading out as you travel away from this centre until it peaks again, slightly, due to the reflected blow-back from the edge of the Time-Space seal, where the Motes of creation work tirelessly to keep out the Outer Chaos. Its scope is vast, so great that mortal minds fail to comprehend it as even the Greater Materiae would be like grains of sand upon a beach. It is rumoured that at the very centre of the Beginning under an unimaginable pressure of life lies the humongous Fey Lens, the Eye of God, drawing new life into the dream-world, to propagate souls into the Material and guarantee and perpetuate the Cycle of Thought.

For those strong enough to bear the heat and lifeforce and able to pass the gatekeepers through diplomacy or otherwise, Solaria acts as a backdoor to the universe. For each Aperture is such, a portal one may yet pass through. Ironically the intense life force, the heat and pressure, makes the realm almost entirely inimical to normal life, which, unable to withstand the energies, is rapidly stripped of its mortal shell, and has its soul blasted out to one of the 18 planes, often that which is nearest or that which is dearest.

There are 21 primary Apertures, one for each outer plane and the three bodies, each manned (at least in theory, some of the more extreme planes reflect more unusual Apertures) by a city and God to serve their plane as their sun, are suspended throughout this verse-heart. Strewn between them in constellations of the arcane are all the other Aetherium Apertures that cast light onto all the lit minor and demi-planes, many of which are similarly built up and “manned” or at least maintained. These apertures are akin to giant, perfectly circular, gates, though made not of any glass or material, but woven planes-stuff, essential to the formation of any plane. Around this a massive construction, a world-city, is often made, to ensure the proper function of the aperture and the maintenance of the plane. Great machine - that is to say complex tools operated in part or whole by magic - ships drift from gate-city world to gate-city world, harvesting the rare crystals and other aetheric material that drifts on strange currents between, and ensure good function of the realm.

**Musei**, spirit-like creatures, often very outsider-esque in their appearance like micro-life and bacteria writ gargantuan, roam the Beginning, lifting soul-stuff for mysterious purposes, drifting in the aetheric winds, and impervious or incorporeal to nearly all sorts of interaction, but nevertheless fulfilling some enigmatic function or cycle. Many musei seem to fulfil no purpose at all, and yet here they are, and only here. Mushi-shi are those said to call upon these spirits to channel magic; healing, scorching and cleansing, and to also deal with lost Musei who have wandered into the material or other plane, causing unintentional havoc.

### The Seal and the Motes of Primas
Those beings of exceptional power or means may be able to travel to the very edge of the Universe, and walk upon the seal itself, observing the last Motes of Primas working to maintain the boundary of the Universe against the unending carnage of the primordial chaos. What they may want with that place, or witness there, is a mystery to most Gods, let alone mortals.

**Mote of Primas** – this tiny fragment of the first being holds no intelligence, but is capable of repairing anything so long as the tiniest of fragment of it remains. Within moments, the Mote can weave the entire thing back to full and functioning form. If used on the living, they are fully healed from all ails. If used on the dead, a fresh and whole corpse is made, that merely lacks a soul. Certain rituals can call back old souls, if they have not yet completed their journey, or channel a new soul into the vessel, becoming then like an infant, fresh and unknowing. The Mote then needs an amount of time to recharge proportional to the size and complexity of the work undertaken, anything from a minute (repairing a patch in cloth) to a year (reconstructing a mansion from a brick, a body from a hair) or so on. If not properly bottled, the mote will Blink back to the Seal of Time and Space.

The Church of Everlasting Light considers such Motes to be holy artefacts of God Itself, and are treated with utmost reverence.

Why do such motes exist? For the most obvious of reasons. The Seal of Time and Space, and the final and only true border between the primordial chaos and the universe, is constantly assailed and degraded, and as such needs constant repair and maintenance. Only such miraculous items are fit for such a sisyphean task.

### The Outer
The Outer One, the Destroyer here resides, amidst primordial chaos that was not made into the universe. No mortal mind can comprehend it, and no being of the universe can step beyond the seal without being utterly and completely rent. It seeds Exanima into the world, to seek agents to assist it in crumbling this Universe, from the inside out, corrupting beings of the universe into horrendous forms. Not even it can pass the Seal, as our universe is as inimical to it as it is to us, and yet it seeks to erase all the universe.
