# Cosmology

### Creation
The First God, a six handed swirl of living cosmos, known variously as ‘The First’, ‘Sem’, or ‘Primas’, came from the primordial chaos. It was the first intention, the first act, the first Word. It looked upon the primordial chaos and Spoke, creating the Seal of Time and Space. Suddenly, there was parity; not-universe, and universe. Everything was within it, or was the Outer Beyond.

Slowly it then refined the tumultuous universe within the seal, drawing out layers of the primordium, creating a foundation. The first refinement of the primal stuff was to deal with the clashing absolutes. The Prime rent the essential contradictions of the eternal chaos out in three waves, creating the 18 planes of alignment in their three firmaments; outer, medial and inner. Great distance, a new concept, and time would see these absolutes settle and take their forms, and the inner universe coalesced.

Then It worked on the overpowering fundamental Elements that were constantly tearing the inner universe apart and fusing it together in new, rough forms. Working those Elements like a potter works clay, The First calmed them, concentrating their essences into grand tools and mighty reservoirs of raw matter and energy. It spoke and Word became Form, and it tied up the gathered Elements into a dense self-supporting dimension known as the "Elemental Braid", set to surround the heart of the universe and power the workings It was yet to create through the World Fonts, where braid was anchored to world.

In the now calm, and for the first time still, centre of creation lay the pregnant yet inert Matter of the Materia. It gathered Its Elemental Tools together, readied the Fonts of the braid, and to properly enact its vision, split itself into three. Them ‘Sendum’, Him ‘Sendus’, and Her ‘Senda’. Together they set out and forged their chosen clay, shaping and dividing the Elemental rock into the plains, mountains and valleys of the three physical realms. The three filled in the valleys and basins with Water to be seas and rivers, breathed Air onto them to fill the void, and drove it all with the heat and energy of Fire. Though Three, they were united as One with their Will and their Hope, and that Will was reflected in the connected roots at the heart of the realms, and that Hope in the ether that lay over them all in its immaterial promise, potential and flitting wishes. They and Him and Her made the Material Plane, Shadowfell, and Fey Wild.

Then finally, the Elemental Tools blunted, the World Fonts run dry and their divine energy spent, they shattered themselves, using their own essence to sow the new realms with all the Shapes of living things, all the Images of ideas and concepts, all the Forms of objects and items, and with the last echoes of the first Word, they bridged the new worlds to that final place, which was also The Beginning, and began the Cycle of Thought, turning the still image they had wrought into a living world.

All that was left of the primordial chaos within the sealed universe was a quiet emptiness with nothing left of it but the small glimmering heart of pre-creation, stripped back, compressed, and refined into its very essence, all other aspects stripped away to form The Great Wheel; the will to life. In this place, woven in to the very fabric of the Universe, The Beginning of all things and the Ultimate End of them all too, the First Soul glimmered, and as the Three bridged it all with as their last act, Light & Life descending onto the planes through the newly opened lenses, along the pathways and down the veins The Three had lain down. 

From a divine canvas the first life took its first steps, turned from still vision to a dynamic world of beauty, embodying all the inimicals and elements, whilst being bound to the strictures of none of them. The first beings of the braided elements and the spun-off absolutes reared their heads towards this new stage, and the first Shapes and Images and Forms stepped out of the shadow of the Three, all echoing the Word, and reached with newly formed hands towards the realms.

And so the Cycle of Thought started and the great game of the Gods began, to see into what the Universe would grow. What ways would it Struggle, Learn, and Reflect? What would be the ultimate purpose of the universe? Would it be eternal?

### The Great Wheel
The shape of the Universe is called The Great Wheel by scholars, and it encompasses all things, a great ordered work of the Prime, woven from the infinite primordial chaos.

At the centre of the universe are the Three Bodies, the Earthly Planes, the Physical Realms, the three planes of existence. Once intimately linked, since the shattering they are known as the "Fae Wild", the "Materium Existentiae", and the "Shadowfell". They are yet bound together at their cosmological roots by what many call the "Underneath", the "Underdark", or the "Place-between-places", where the things that are lost fall between the cracks to go, and at their cosmological ceiling by the Etherium, the land that never-was, the Ethereal Plane. 

The physical realms are surrounded by a boundary of calm water known by the Warping Ship sailors and captains as the "Eternal Calm", although historically it is a relatively recent creation, the quiet aftermath that was the Astral Sea.

Around this core of the universe the four elements are braided and bound against each other in the Elemental Braid, like an arch holding up a great weight above the ground, made to prevent their remaining raw power from sundering all, thus allowing life to grow; free of the crushing depths, blistering heat, earthen mass and scourging wind. When they press close to one of the realms, they can be seen in the sky as great wreathing ribbons of light and colour, clashing and braiding, briefly mixing to make all the colours of the rainbow.

Around them are the long teased away absolutes, drawn out of the primordial to allow a balanced nucleus to form. From these realms of absolutes rose beings of absolutes and, as they inevitably clashed, the eternal heavenly struggle began. Beings of pure Good, pure Reason, pure Passion, pure Logic, pure Chaos, beings of precise shades of the others and yet incompatible with none of them, all trying and ultimately failing to assert their nature on the others. The nature of their realms is not a physical one, and the outermost of the planes can make a mortal’s mind twist, for they push up against the very edge of the time and space seal and the laws there get a lot more… loose.

One of the few common grounds the absolutes can use are the Physical Realms. There they temper and give patronage to much more flexible mortals who fight and win in their stead, in a way able to impose ideology in ways the absolutes are simply unable. Their planes are also the last waypoints of many a dead Soul, on their way back to The Beginning, and the souls, memories and wills of the dead are great bargaining chips and tokens for these who play the impossible game.

Beyond the absolutes is The Beginning. The last and most pure heart of all things, the primordium, the universe, and all life. From this, the souls descend to the Earthly Spheres, starting as a Dream, living in the Material, and passing through the Shadow to filter beyond the braid and absolutes. To the Beginning they return when their time in the realms is done. During the soul's journey it is at first pure and empty, but then after its life is done it has gained colour and, holding all its Graces and all its Sins, to be accounted and atoned, it passes through the Absolutes and the Elements. During its journey a soul reflects and gains the Truth of its Being until it returns to the Beginning, to that place that defines Space and Time, no heavier for its travels, but far wiser.

The very edge of the universe, the Seal of Time and Space, is a thin sheen that binds the entire universe, woven by the First God as the First Act. It is the progenitor of all containment, and the ward. Without this immense working, time would not tick, and distance would be meaningless. The chaos beyond time, only through division of time and space from not-time and not-space, has birthed The Other/Outer One. The grand destroyer, that seeks to undo the universe, and bring everything back to unity in unfettered primordial chaos, including itself.

### Depiction
The Great Wheel, as the name implies, is often represented as a wheel, one with spokes and layers. 

At its hub are the three physical worlds, normally abbreviated to the "Three Worlds" or the “Physical Realms". The centre of the hub is the Fey Wild, around it, taking up about half the area and oriented to the top left, is the body of the Material Realm, and around that is the Shadow Realm, a stretched out and dark place, the end of the material spiral. Around that hub are four braided bands, the elemental matters, swirling in their pseudo-chaos, forming, breaking and reforming into miniature realms based on their combinations. Beyond the braid are the Outer Planes. Sometimes they are represented simply as the 18 spokes of the Great Wheel leading to the rim that is the Space and Time Seal. Sometimes however the Wheel is represented by an outermost hexagon around a circle or nonagon of nine planes itself around an innermost inverse triangle; the outer, centre and inner firmaments, respectively.

The Outer Firmament points upward traditionally, with the 9-point star of Good at its peak, the seven disordered points of Chaos to the upper left, the flame of Passion in the lower left, the undone triangle of Evil at the base, the isometric cube of Logic in the lower right, and the eye of knowing Reason between Good and Logic to the upper right. The Centre Firmament is then depicted with a circle with 9 equidistant planes or an inverted nonagon. Starting upper left-most and heading clockwise one finds; Good Reason, Logical Good, Reasoned Logic, Evil Logic, Logical Passion, Passionate Evil, Passionate Chaos, Passionate Good, and Chaotic Good. The Inner Firmament contains the tri-coloured planes of Arcadia (Good Reasoned Law) near the cosmological border of Material and Shadow, Gehenna (Passionate Evil Law) near the cosmological border of Fae and Shadow, and Ysgard (Passionate Chaotic Good) near the cosmological border of Fae and Material.

The 6 points of the Outer Firmament are often referred to as the three cosmological axes. 
- The Axis Of Morality: of Good-Evil to judge what is right (good for Life) and wrong (bad for Life), governed by Faith (the power to hear and teach what is right)
- The Axis of Desire: of Passion-Reason to feel what is wanted (immediate urges vs long term plans), governed by charisma (the power to feel and to debate what ought be desired)
- The Axis of Choice: of Logic-Chaos to determine how to proceed, governed by intelligence (the power to learn and figure out how-to).

The Material plane, the Fey Wild, and the Shadowfell, the Three worlds built by the three Godly Forms, balance each other in the centre of the Great Wheel, with some representations having them mirror the outer triangle's Good, Logic and Passion, but many say the physical realms are the result of different balances of all the absolutes and that being places at the centre of the universe and beyond the braid and planes, they embody all three of the cosmological axes.

At least, they once brought balance to each other. The Wild is over-verdant, producing too much. The Shadow is a drain on all things, swallowing all excess. The Material was a place of transition and trial, where balance and equal measure were found, sometimes that of the stable dip, sometimes that of the unstable peak. The cataclysm was the breaking of that balance, the shattering of the Middle World, flooding it with the Astral Sea and creating the Mists. The Cataclysm also broke much of the Place Between Places, cutting off the other two physical realms, setting them adrift, and filled the ether with fear and horror.

### The Flow of Ideas, The Cycle of Thought
> “Gemination, Realisation, Crystallisation, Rumination, Reflection, Absolution, Repetition” – The Seven Fold Path of the Universalist Church.

Each Idea, each Word, each Life goes through the Cycle. First it gestates in the Fractal Dream, coalescing from many potentialities, hopes and past echoes, then it’s born and lived out in the Material, and then falls into stillness and death in the Shadow. Once it has been stripped of all Earthly energies and weight, memories and deeds weighed in the palaces of the raven, its soul Passes through its rightful outer places to find Reckoning. Once Complete, the spirit is etched on the edifice of the Beginning from whence they first came, ready for the next coalescing. 

“From this, the souls descend to the Earthly Realms, starting as a Dream, living in the Material, and passing through the Shadow to filter beyond the braid and absolutes. To the Beginning they return when their time Beyond is done. During the soul's journey it is at first pure and empty, but then after its life is done it has gained colour and karma and, holding all its Graces and all its Sins, it passes through the Absolutes and the Elements for Rumination, Reflection and Absolution, to be enlightened, accounted and atoned. During its journey a soul reflects and gains the Truth it needs to find Completion, whereupon it returns to the Beginning, to that place that defines Space and Time, no heavier for its travels, but far wiser.” – a popular Universalist sermon. 

The Flow of Ideas is what the Universe is. A great machine of learning and self-reflection; of perception and intuition; of life and death and most of all, growth. A fundamental counter to primordial chaos.

Why? Some say because that’s how it all began. A wish to be. A wish to be more. And so from the Primordial Chaos stepped Prima, wielder of the first imperative.
