# The Three Bodies
The three physical realms, the Shadowfell, the Fae Wild, and the Materium Existentiae, were formed, unlike the rest of reality, by the first three bodies of the Gods and the elemental tools they wielded. So, unlike the rest of Creation, it is bound far more rigidly to Laws and to the effects of material Cause. The three bodies, in their own way, are a closed system of equilibria, a finite (if huge) mini-universe of set matter and energy, all interconnected and interdependent. At least until before the shattering.

When the three had finished crafting their realms, they lay down their lives to weave the last step in the creation of the universe, and with their sacrifice, kick-started the Flow of Ideas, the Cycle of Thoughts, the growth and life of the universe. They bridged the worlds, opened the Sun Apertures, and set to motion all things. The dream and its guardian Seldarine began to churn with all the potential for life, for which the Senda gave her life to birth, calling down Souls from the Beginning, and onto the lands, into the seas and over the skies the first beings took their steps. Sendus, from the Skotite throne, gave his life to weave the palace of memories’ last and most grand function, the ability to allow souls to pass on to their next destination having been weighed and properly directed, and finish the living stage of the Cycle of Thought. Sendum then shattered into a million pieces, to seed the Material with the first life and allow the Dream to Dream and the Shadow to Claim.

The Place Between Places
The Underdark is so named because it lies beneath all the physical planes, connecting them, twisting through and around and under, to emerge once again in a cave or gulley of the Earthly Spheres, though it holds many more names; Las Cavernas, The Underneath, The Place Between Places. Those of most ancient lore call them the Veins of the Gods.

Things call the Underdark home, some of which truly belong to this place, such as the aboleth, the worm in the capillary of the first, the first corruption of the outer-one, the first attempt to undermine the Prime. In the quiet and the gloom beings from the Absolutes or the Elements find it easier to roost, and chew on the roots of reality. Folk wander, having gone below and never emerging, producing races of wide-eyed drifters and burrowing opportunists, such as the forgotten Duergar or the fortune-bereft Githzerai.

The passages of the beneath find themselves filled with those once going to other places but could no longer, and things lost but never found. 

The Shattering rendered the underneath as well, destroying many passageways and twisting others, and creating huge rifts kilometers wide and tens of kilometers deep, earning it the moniker Las Cavernas. Where the cracks bled raw into the void, the roiling Astral Sea, the Mists, flooded in. They now fill a good quarter of the entire place, suddenly appearing to travellers in various passageways and pooling in the crevices of cavernous halls, warping and twisting to ever further madness all that it lays claim to.

Though originally a quiet place that gave home to the unwanted, and as the backdoor of the Earthly bodies for the will of life to flow, the Underneath over the aeons became a place of danger and threat, as it steadily filled with those Outsiders and creatures that took to these shadows away from the sun, with many seeking to take advantage of its omnipresent nature, and those fleeing the death and judgement, notably of the Shadowfell. Now it is ruled by creatures not just of the dark, but of the Dark.

The Drow are perhaps the most infamous of these settlers, anchoring their cities at the largest transitional caverns and cenotes between the physical realms and the Underneath, the better to gather fresh slaves for harvest. They traverse the twisting tunnels to emerge in the other Planes to acquire supplies and capture sacrifices needed for their jaded, twisted Goddess and way of life, and use the ever-present existence of the Underdark to strike deep into the juicy heart of many a mortal civilization, reaping and raiding with glee, to vanish into tunnels that swiftly cease to exist. 

But there are other things less spoken of, those that do not care to show their faces in the stinging brightness of the Material Plane or the overbearing verdancy of the Fae Wild. It is these creatures beyond the pale that give any man, even the greatest of heroes, pause before he descends into the Underneath. Even the Drow, despite their merciless Goddess’ demands for might, have been forced to strike many a bargain and kneel to even the most Dark of creatures that made their homes in the Place-Between-Places. The contents of these deals are best left uncontemplated.

Its nature as a place between the three physical planes gives the dark some interesting physicalities, seemingly bound by the rules of all three places at once. First, down is actually three directions, which is used to keep orientation in there (mat-ward, fey-ward and shadow-ward). If you go down in one direction enough, you’ll eventually get there. Somewhere. Some folk call it the right-hand rule, which also means that there is a direction which only leads you further and further away from all the physical realms. Changing which down you obey is a simple case of projecting your psyche using the following thoughts:
“Think blue and a man at work.”
“Think green and a girl at play.”
“Think black and an elder’s grave.”
Similarly, objects can be imbued with a different orientation of down, when one pushes their will into it, causing it to fall towards the new orientation.

Secondly, the Underdark, as a place outside the Cycle of Thoughts, feeds on those thoughts. Memories and life fade into this place, feeding it, but this process can be manipulated. Those thoughts, then, are far more tangible here than elsewhere. As the place where things go to be forgotten, thought and life can be given to manifest in its halls; items of need for the most desperate come to be in their hands even as they forget what they are. Special plants and lifeforms feed on this essence, so-called epistevores, eventually decaying it away in order to grow. This provides the basis of the ecology of the dark, the shadows of the cycle of life; forests of decay littered with husks of those who wandered in and lost all that they were, unable to leave.

Thirdly, it has no sun, as it is no plane. Being entirely underground may make this seem self-evident, but practitioners of magic know that the apertures of the sun are a fundamental part of the fabric of reality that simply is not defined in the dark. For this reason magical light is almost impossible, for there is no sun to call on. Darkness is absolute. Only elemental Fire yet provides light.

The Ethereal Plane
Like a layer sitting on top of the physical worlds, a “plane” curiously unlike the others in that it is not one of the elemental braid, or one of the cast-out absolutes, nor even physical, but instead a potential phase of physical reality. A slightly different, out of tune, way reality could have been, and through the magical pressure of the balance of the Cosmos, it came to be. 

The Ether is also called the realm that never was, the Unborn. It takes the unclaimed place of Chaotic, Reasoned Good. It echoes with the hope of the Gods, but for all its wonder, it is always immaterial, the cosmic balance to the material worlds. Neither obeying physical law, nor creational law as in the outer planes, it is immaterial, home to the immaterial, and provides all the wonder of that which needs no law. But the chaos of that place makes it ephemeral, and much of it fades and warps quickly. 

The Ethereal is known for how much more powerful the soul is there. It is often mistaken to be the source of the black shadow, the exanima, which is equally heightened, but is in truth home to creatures of pure anima, such as ghosts or Musei migrants from Solaria. The ethereal plane is useful to many academics and experimenters, and dangerous to any unwary travellers.

Most importantly, the Mists do not reach here, though projecting not just the seeming of something, but its entire physical self, into the ethereal plane to bypass the corrupting force of the Mist is extremely difficult, and risky, for the physical is not welcome in the Ethereal, nor does the ethereal map often reflect the territory, and phasing back finds a traveller buried in rock, plunged in the sea, or lost to the Mists.

The Shard of Eilistraee
In an area of the Ethereal, there sits apart from the ghostly outline of Eden a collection of chunks of the Materiae Existentiae, naturally drawn together as the lost are wont in Eilistraee’s presence. They make up a patchwork land known as Eilistraee’s Sanctuary, also known as The Eye of the Ghost Moon, and form her Holy Land, to which connections are often made through Blink Gates to her other scattered holdings for the Lost.

Shadowfell - The Black Mirror
The story of the first Wild Hunt, when First Men rode into the verdant gateway, into the land of cycles and whimsy for the first time, has a younger brother. It is not much spoken of, and after the Shattering only scraps of that story remain, and only the very learned even know of it, let alone know it. Shadowfell is the very opposite of the Fae realm. The black mirror of it. Shadowfell does not dance. 

The Shadowfell is bleak and dark, small and decaying, each day different, but each day the lesser, the energy of a day stretched out over a year. Every act has its final inevitable toll, and it is always measured. Time flows slowly, but energy fades rapidly; torches burn down to cinders in moments, but even a scratch fails to heal for weeks, cursing most all life to the inevitability of slow death. 

No sun shines, its aperture is sewn shut by the Lady Braille of the Awl, for it would be anathema to this place. Springs spew water and rains do fall, though the waters leech away into parched earth and rivers run dry ever before they reach the “ocean”, a vast desert of grey fines and course gravel, and every year their seems to be less water. What seas remain have fallen low, ebbing slowly year by year, and briny, inhospitable to most life. The mountains and ridges grow steadily taller, the crags between sinking deeper, and the land creeps further into hostility. The shadows of great civilizations cast ghostly effigies and ruins in the Fell where no people ever lived, haunting this place with their faded dreams. This is the end of the material world, and the end of life.

It is the end of the Flow of Ideas, where a Thought comes to lie to rest and have its worth weighed, and pass on to the outer firmaments, to find judgement, justice and denouement. 

Everything ‘born’ there is a shadow made by a thing blocking something out, be that life or light, magic or hope, stretching far from the profile of the material. Those that shine brighter in life, etch stronger shadows in death. Sometimes these shadows rise to move of their own accord, or reach out to ensure its source extinguishes as it should. To draw one to death and the end, to go out and leave. 

Nevertheless, it is a physical realm, and life, even twisted life, can and does exist. Things naturally die and fade here, so only those that coddle or feed on death are able to survive and grow, leaching from that which was; always diminishing in balance. Lifeforce is the currency of the end-place, the essence of the souls collected and ferried. They, and the shadows they cast as they weave from the world of the living realm to this place, powers nearly all processes in this sunless land. 

All things in the Shadow can be Sacrificed/Drained from one greater thing into something lesser, if more useful in the moment, twisting and wringing life force into different forms and for new energies, pushing out of the material world to send it onward, gone, used up, forever. Though different and by some respects new, what is Drained is always less than the sum of what was Sacrificed, and it is by this principle that that which lives there survives, by using up the lifeforce of the material. Such is the role of the Shadow, to be a drain on the realised growth of the materiae, to pass on that life and experience onto the next stage of the Cycle. 

One such example of the many sacrifices made in the dark is the use of ghost lights over torches. Torches burn out twice as quickly in the dark. So most natives make use of a ghost light, an old soul that steadily burns with a soft blue light, lasting as long as the life it draws from. 

And so, when the world was yet young, some First Men journeyed to the shadow, or were pulled there, they were instructed to make the First Sacrifice, to seed the shadow with life so that it may suffer and pull on the essences of life, to drive the draining pressures of the lands. And it twisted them. 

The death that lingers in every fold of reality there drove them to take drastic measures and embrace the principle of sacrifice like no other thing of that place before them, as intended, possessed as they were with the wit and will for industrious civilization that nothing in the shadow could hold a candle to. They made pact with the things that call that place home, the natives born of shadows and other creatures that had fled there, working dark rituals of great sacrifice to seed the earth, ignite the Sun Pyres to light the crops and draw clean water from stagnant pools. Like the land they occupied, they became the dark mirror of their counterparts in the Verdant Plane, the Shadar-Kai. Now they are bound, to the land and the air and the waters of that dark place, and most of all to their goddess, the Raven Queen, who strode to power on their backs and bound their souls into the roots of the shadow, and placed herself on the Skotite Throne.

Sometimes the Shadows make demands, and the Shadar-Kai obey. A dark mirror to the many crusades of the white, the Marches of the Long Death and the companies of the Shadar-Kai “immortals/deathless” seek those that would evade the inevitable embrace of death, and bring death to them. Those that would corrupt souls and prevent their ability to Sacrifice, to move onwards, they drag, kicking and screaming, down into the dark. But they do so reluctantly and only with great need. When the shadow comes to step into the light, it makes all around them paler and less significant. Death, as they are the harbingers and shepherds of it, comes more easily when the Marches step, and many sick folk, weak willed infants and elderly nearing the end of their time, find their lives snuffed like candles in a storm, lingering disease and wasting sickness spreading in their wake. Such is the tragedy of the Shadow, for never is there malice in their reapings, and many an innocent is swept up in the storm.

Spurred by their Goddess’ teachings, nothing must falter the Cycle of Thoughts, say the warriors of the Sun Pyre societies. Do not betray that sanctity or their patron, for you paint your door with an invitation for the shadow. And they do not respect guest rite.

In the Shadow all but shadow magic, the corruptive anti-life and generally poorly understood, and the fires of sacrifice sputters and fails. Some parts of the fell have a greater drain than others, a reverse of the materia’s mana topography. These negative values weaken all magic, forcing magi to sacrifice greater mana for lesser and lesser effect. 

The Shadow is also said to be the true home of necromantic magics, as it is the place where all turn to souls to survive. Though such magics are often easier to use and learn, the drain on magical energy lessens them too. To use necromancy to refute death is blasphemy, and necromancers of the wrong sort are hunted here too. It is eternal life lichs crave, and the shadow holds only death. 

The Shadow is the last of the physical worlds before outer planes and the Barrier of Time and Space, since that is its design, but this sometimes means that other things from those places journey here first. Maintaining the sanctity of the Shadow is also the Shadar-Kai’s calling, and the ancient and nigh unheard-of War of Shade and Blight is what saw the Raven Queen rise and the Shadar-Kai become such knights of sanctity.

But because of this, the Shadow is home to much exanima, and it leaks up into the worlds beyond, tracing perversely back along the Flow of Ideas to twist at life and rend it into its destructive mockery, that all the world may be slain. The Shadar-Kai, over the ages, have had to step up more and more to check the rising tide of destruction, even as they continue their duty as ferrymen and guardians of the Palace of Memories, and the slowly ebbing, flowing and escalating war of Shade and Blight consumes and twists them; particularly as demons of the abyss become cohorts of the void, and the war in the hells bleeds over. 

The Shadow is said to stretch and fade everything out, and that includes time. Whereas the Fae courts treat time more as a wet clay to be moulded and worked into pleasing shapes, the Shadow merely stretches it out, paper thin and vast. Those caught in its embrace may find that though they spent years in the company of the grey plains, shadow beasts and Shadar-kai, only for a month to pass back home, and that in a curious twist of fate, their lives have been stretched over that time too. Shadar-kai live almost a thousand years, if woven from human stuff, and the oldest of the custodians, the Lieutenants and Generals of the Raven Queen and the Marches who trace their lives back to the Age of the Gods, have lived for almost unimaginable aeons.

The Shadow does not receive the Light of the Beginning, for it would undermine that place. Its Aperture is sewn shut by Brielle, the Lady of the Awl, the blind Goddess of Shadow and Portent that resides in Solaria, but the Shadar-Kai maintain a number of Sun Spires around which their primary settlements grow. These mountains or artificial spires are humongous pyres for burning souls that have been judged in the Palace of Memories, shipped out on the backs of Mammoth-like skeletal creatures. The souls are not destroyed by this process, merely moved onwards (technically the energy of their life-force fuels the flames while the Spirit alone moves on once freed of its last material traces, and thus provides the crops with their life energy to grow). The core of any soul, the Spirit, is not physical and thus indestructible. It is an expression of the Beginning and the End and destruction of that is nonsensical, let alone impossible. 

The pyres generate huge spheres of light and warmth, artificial suns. As they burn out and are refilled an imitation of night and day is made, they feed crops that grow in great ringed fields around them, and the spires / mountain keeps become the cities of the Shadar Kai. The Raven Queen, however, maintains a cracked sapphire and emerald globe floating mysteriously above her palace of memories, and no Sun Mounts are allowed nearby.

Outside the Palace and Towers of civilization the horrors of the shadow lurk, and in the deepest of the dark where no Sun Spire rises, the behemoths, mome raths and jabberwockies lie. 

Effects: negative mana magnitude, non life processes sped up (scaling to magnitude). 

The Fractal Dream and the Symbolic Courts
Bathed in perpetual dusk/dawn, the Fae Wild is both the land of potential and of dreams. Though it is thought of as the land of abundant life, in truth it is not the land of life, that title instead belonging to the Material, but is instead the land of the Fractal Dream, the gestational first step of the Cycle. It holds both the reflections of life, what it desires and what it could have been, and all its possibilities at once; the dreams and hopes for the next generations. 

The fey is forest and jungle, mire and reef; as if the world was bursting with chaotic life, surging and resplendent, but also cycling and repeating, in a mad fractal dance of echoing patterns and mini-cycles. By definition, it’s the lucid dream of life; vaster, chaotic and ever fluctuating, but also never quite real. The fey is what life may enact and put to praxis. 

Its power is that of realised and unrealised symbolism, that tropes have literal power to shape the flow of reality. Any trope or pattern that can be named, has power here. And so, everything is mirrored, and everything has its mirror. Rhythms of three dominate, and the strictures of reality take a back seat. The greater the relevance of the trope to the partakers and involved, the stronger its hold. It is the narrative principle played very straight. [Naming a trope when committing an action grants advantage, going against the grain causes disadvantage. Completing a pattern of 3 grants a flat 20 on the dice].  

Time here is also relative, looping and eddying, flowing rapidly or languidly pooling. Place too is relative, with intention being more important than direction and distances being a matter of personal relevance. Implication holds more power than objectivism, and consequences oft go backwards. If it looks like a gnome did it, then such a gnome may come into existence. Contraquences, as the locals say. 

In this land of unborn potential, what was born there, or at the very least came to be there, was The Seldarine. The multi-faced Spirit of the Fae; the Pantheon in One. They are the God/Goddess of that place, born of the dream of Senda. Some say they are Senda, the last of the creators, as yet unspent. It is the spirit of creation yet made, of potential yet made into reality. Prepraxis. 

The First Men explored their world and through their earliest shamans and druids came to know of the Fey Wild. They found, or were found by, the Seldarine and were bewitched and entranced by the abundance and joy of its realm, and came to live there, embracing its principles. Over the many millennia of pre-history, a civilisation of courts and cycles within the green Wyld flourished, dreaming hither and thither. The Fomorians fell and Lolth rose; the Scarlet Fields she wrought bringing about the Green Flight where even Lord Cardigan and his court of bystanders were ousted. But the Symbolic Courts remain, and the fractal dance goes on. 

Many of the First yet remain there in the Fey, and are what are known as "True Elves”, or “Eladrin”. Things like men, but not, changed by their millennia in the dream, becoming dreamlike themselves. Like an idol seen reflected imperfectly in a mirror, still crisp and beautiful but slightly warped and unsettling in ways unidentifiable, dancing in the reflected light. These creatures are the final denizens of the Fractal Dream, and bargaining with them is a mistake.

The laws of Creation have little hold in the dream, or too much, for all in a way wield such power to create, to dream up new stuff, but the impermanent nature of the place as the birth of ideas, constantly changing the fabric of the place, means that nothing is permanent, and all stuff wrought is quickly undone. Ironically the more powerful of fey beings are those able to coral and maintain larger demesnes for longer; permanence in a people and a place renowned for their changeability.  

Bottled Dreams and the Dream Worlds
Lucid dreamers are able to hold their own courts while they sleep, dreaming up new pockets of their own and often drawing visitors, though most fail to realise the weight of their actions. Bottled Dreams, by dream artists who imbue potions with a dream of their making for sale, are perhaps the most well “known” of the fey world from the perspective of affluent city dwellers of cities highly developed in the arcane who keep far from the forests. Those who do know of the true courts in a more personal fashion have a better, more violent, understanding of that place.

Effects: everything regenerates unless storied away; beings implied rejuvenate d6 HP per round. Beings who are set-up to fall decay d6HP per round. 
Naming a trope when committing an action grants advantage, going against the grain causes disadvantage. Completing a pattern of 3 grants a flat 20 on the dice. 
