# Giantkin, Goliaths, and Ancient Tales
>“The clan came here not three seasons ago, but let me tell you a tale from my father who they called Butcher. He said that his father, who they called Biter, heard from his distant cousin who they called Knuckle-Tosser, who was from another clan by the Sea, heard from his ancestor who I think he said was called Fishhead, for some reason. Anyway, so he said, he Fishhead, he said that...” – from the autodidacted journals of Sam of Tavington, who earned the moniker “Patient”.

### The Giants, not Titans
The giants are not one of the known peoples, Men or Little. They have long been a bit of a mystery, and though they make pains to distance themselves from it, the giants are often mistaken for the Titans of legend. As tightly tied as they currently are to the elements, with many a story told of vicious ice giants, imperious fire giants, wise sky giants and brutish hill giants, they have long primarily dwelled in the high up places since before even The Shattering, and maintained their own sorts of insular balance within their Ordnung, their law-come-philosophy-come-religion.

Though scholars of giant lore are far and few between, due to their tendency to get squashed for asking impertinent questions and the sheer difficulty of reaching them, there are rumours of a truly ancient war, one that occurred thousands of years before the Shattering or the Winged War, or even the Green Flight, between the two wielders of the Words of creation, The Wyrm and The Titan. Now all that is known is that the Giants keep to their ancient and lofty halls of power, bound to the elements in some curious way, and the dragons that remained were later bound during the Shattering by the Edict of the Gods for wielding those very same Words, with no mention of the Giants needing similar binding. In fact, what few records remain, seem to note that the giants often helped enfore the Edict with glee.

### Cloudcrest
At the confluence of the Fold and Spur, neigh inaccessible and definitively not part of the Empire, is Cloudcrest, the city and heartland of the giants of Mitteland. Cloudcrest is something of an anomaly, the only place in Mitteland where giants are known to gather, in a city so high it naturally honours the Ordnung. 

The various other giant holdings along the ancient Spur were heavily damaged or destroyed during the Shattering, often getting buried or careening off of cliffs, and now sit as empty haunting ruins of times long lost. The easist to visit is probably the Giganters Ambassade in the heart of Var, long converted into aristochratic appartments, a theater, a fine-dining establishment and a museum. 

The land that would become Cloudcrest was similarly damaged by the shattering, but was thrust kilometres into the air at the confluence of the new Fold and the Spur. Although the original settlement was mauled almost beyond recognition, the surviving giants of the various holds, and there were many for giants are a hardy people, gathered at the ruined settlement so high above the ground clouds gathered below, and renamed it Cloudcrest. The altitude is so graet that the air is too thin for lesser folk, which is just fine by the giants, where they built a fortress beneath the stars. Rumours persist of a few other settlements being rebuilt or founded here and there, by giants of one element or another, but they are lesser and secret, and the majority of giant kin in Mitteland are found in Cloudcrest these days, or are wanderers following esoteric paths. 


### Goliaths and Firbolgs
Goliaths seem to be related to the giants, and they will tell you in repitition as much, though much of their origins too are as equally shrouded in ancient pre-history. Scholars would argue that such a relation is impossible, as impossible as the union of a man and halfling. Yet as a race they exist, taller than humans at 8ft to 9ft, and honouring of the Ordnung in their clans. Though many will note that they're still not within a hairs breadth of the size of even smaller giants, and they don't seem to be bound to the elements in any way at all.

They're tall strong folk that soon joined the ranks of the peoples of the earth, though a small few kept with their giantkin ancestors in the wild and more elemental places. Many tribes took to greener pastures, but all retain a soft-spot in their gigantic hearts for distant peaks, arboreal vistas, watery depths and dune-filled deserts, and venerate their ancestors who they believe return to the Great Braid. Post-Shattering and a thousand years later and the Goliaths of the home constellation have ended up with a rather similar honour-based culture to that of the Tuskmen, albeit with a perennial connection to the Giants and their Ordnung, where they have kept up with the Giants’ tongue and are often seen as “their (very) little cousins”. A somewhat ironic statement from the perspective of Humanity and the Little Peoples.

In the Home Constellation, there is little sign of the Firbolg, the other somehow-giant-related humanoid. There exists nothing more than ancient footnotes in forgotten history, though surely there is a hidden village or two of these nature-align, curiously prone to lycanthropy and yet communal, good and nurturing giant-kin here or there.

**Goliaths** can be found in the Elemental Evil Player’s Companion. **Firbolgs** can be found in Volo’s Guide to Monsters.

### Other Giant Kin
Cyclops, Ettins, Fomorians (of whom the fae like to perform various plays, often contradictory, of their fall), Ogres, Oni, Trolls, and others, are the so-called monstrous giant-kin, and each have their own creation stories, twisted out of true-giants. Of note are the Ettins and Ogres, which are rumoured to be creations or wholesale corruptions of others by Gruumsh. They featured prominently in the roaming Legions of Terror of pre-Cataclysm, and only very rarely throw off the yolk enough to be admitted into Stannis' New Army. The Oni are the demon-blooded giantkin, and fearsome for it, and the Trolls those rumoured to have fallen in with the Unseelie as the traitors-within of the Fall of the Fomorians. Some say Cyclops' must be a result of wizarding experiments, like the Owlbear, and indeed were a favoured tool of some sorcerer kings like Oled the Cruel.

Those few men who managed to meddle with Giant Blood, through whatever possible means, ended up producing the Goliaths, the Firbolg, and the other civilized giantkin. 

